My name is Jill Willie and it's the 20th of February 2019.
And I'm here talking to Doreen Price
at her home in Bringuirada.
And our aim is to seek out Doreen's memories
of the use of Riddikai Ross
and from there to learn something about the Ross management
and stories generally in the area.
And it was in 1947, you said Doreen,
that your husband's family bought Riddikai.
So let's start now with the description
of the Ross pasture and particularly that of Riddikai.
Yes.
Whether it's wet, you know, whether it's been useful.
Could you advise?
Well, yes, it's beyond improvement
because it was so flat there.
You could never drain that, you see, it was too flat.
But it was a useful as a run with the fields above,
you see, it was especially for the sheep, mountain sheep,
they like to wander around,
they don't like to be penned up anywhere.
So it was a useful place and in the spring,
they could have some water there, you see,
in the puddles and things when they were producing milk
for their lambs.
So it was a useful piece of ground that way, yes.
And was it a useful resource
for a summer grazing cattle tour?
Yes, that's right, yes.
We used to put the cattle out there beginning of May, say,
and we'd feed them for the time.
But as the millennium grass started to grow,
it was sweet then, you see.
And they grazed that, it was nice grazing,
but once it gets stale, nothing wants to eat it, you see.
So it was useful that way, yes.
I see.
And did you harvest any rushes for animal bedding?
Not off that, not off that, no.
What about digging turf or peat for fuel?
No, no, no, we never did that, no.
Gathering rushes for rush lights?
Oh, no.
Nothing like that.
No, that's right, no.
What about ponies in summer?
Well, no, my husband had a riding pony,
but we never put him out on that, no.
So, no.
Now then, what about medicinal properties?
Was this pasture deemed to have medicinal properties,
and did you put sickly animals on it to graze?
Oh, no, definitely not.
We'd want those near to where we lived, you see,
to look after them, or in the building.
Yes, we know we never put a sickly animal out there.
I see.
Now, regarding the activities on the Riddikarp Ross,
how exactly did you organize these activities?
For instance, were the farms cattle kept indoors
through the winter?
Yes.
And then?
Yes, that's right, and then as the spring developed,
we'd have them outdoors for the summer.
Yes, that's right, yes.
And they stayed all summer, Doreen, did they?
Well, not necessarily.
We'd move them to other pastures, you see.
We wouldn't keep so many there all the time.
You know, it would come and go,
according to how the grass was there, you see.
So, no, we didn't keep them there all the time, no, too.
I see.
Now, was there any risk attached
to putting the stock on the Riddikai Ross, for instance?
Did they get stuck in the bogs?
Well, the last, well, I don't know,
was it three or four years that we had stock there?
For the first time ever, we had two cows stuck in the bog,
and never since 1947 until about 2002 or 2003.
And we had two, one each year,
and we had to get the fire engine from Raider to get them out.
Did you really?
I presume they did a wonderful job.
Yes, yes, yes, they do, yes, that's right, yes.
What about diseases, Doreen?
Did the cattle suffer from fluke, liver fluke, anything?
No, there was a disease called black water,
and on odd time, we'd have a cow with that.
But it was very rare, but I can't really say
whether they were grazing there or on another pasture.
I don't know where they were grazing, you see.
So, but there was that, that's what they called it anyway,
I don't know, too.
I see, now, regarding the drainage of the Riddikairoas,
did you drain at all?
No, no, no, you couldn't drain it,
it was too flat, you see, going to the stream at the bottom.
It wasn't, and that's why it's a SSSI, you see,
it wasn't a piece of ground that you could drain.
It was too flat.
I see.
And was the Riddikairoas a lot bigger
before the forestry came?
Was there generally more roast pasture
throughout the district in the past,
prior to forestry coming?
I wouldn't have thought so.
We've got a little bit, you see, over on that goitre
where you'd cross when you were going with the,
walking up into the forestry, at the bottom of that neck,
down next to the brook, there's a little bit there.
But no, I can't say that that made any difference, really.
I see, yes.
And so why do you think the roast is still there then, Doreen?
What reason do you think it's still there for?
Is it too difficult to drain?
Oh yes, that's right, yes,
it's the natural state of the piece of ground.
It's, you know, like where these boggy places are,
you know, yes, that's right.
Do you feel that the soil is too poor to use there?
Well, and it's wet, you see, you wouldn't,
you couldn't improve it in any, you see,
it isn't a place you could plough or anything like that,
you see, to improve it.
So really, it doesn't have an awful lot of use,
you know, is there?
Well, no, it's for these certain plants and that,
they found there was 122 different species
of plant life on there.
That's what it's famous for.
So I would think so.
And following on from that,
did you have personal memories of wildlife
such as lapwings, butterflies?
Well, lapwings and curlews used to be out there
and nested and we did see some wild geese
with their gullies out there.
Well, they probably came from Lingwin,
but we never saw them, I think Mr. Raynard had them before,
they were able to fly from there.
We never saw them bigger than good lumps like this,
you know, yes, but we've seen wild geese out there as well.
But oh yes, and we'd hear the birds singing, you know,
cause there was quite a few trees there, you know,
if you walk about now in the spring and summertime,
they'd be in full song out there, yes.
And do you feel there was more wildlife,
more plentiful wildlife when you were younger?
Do you feel there was more wildlife, more flowers,
more everything?
Well, we didn't really study the flowers a lot, you know.
There used to be those,
we used to call them golden globes next to that stream,
well, you'd never see those now,
I don't know how they've disappeared.
You see, they were a nice little yellow,
almost like a big buttercup and it was like a global flower,
but and king cups and you know, different things like that.
But I mean, though that sort, and we used to see,
well, we used to call them shivery shakes,
they were like a grass with a circular,
silvery vertical on the top.
And you see in the wind, they'd fly like that
and they were shimmering.
Well, we never see those now,
I hadn't seen those for a long time.
So how, why they disappeared, I don't know.
So.
And as we were hearing last night at Raider by Nature,
hopefully the marsh artillery will make.
Yes, that's right, yes, that's right, yes.
Do you remember the marsh artillery in your younger days?
Do you remember those butterflies?
No, I don't, but do you see,
I wasn't so much into wildlife then, you see,
we were farming and looking at animals
and to see that their wellbeing was all right, you see.
And if they were lambing,
we were looking for young lambs and something like that.
You see, I can't say that I ever looked really
for things like that.
Things like that, not a priority, I suppose,
when you're a busy farmer.
No, that's right, no.
So then.
Yes, well, we have to ask this question now.
Do you recall or have you heard stories of children
playing in the Riddikar-Ross?
What did they get up to?
No, well, I didn't, yeah, but you see,
like as I say, my husband was grown up before they had,
they bought that, so you see,
and I never ever heard him saying anything about that, no.
So he used to collect birds' eggs, you know,
when he was young, he got quite a good selection
at Ashfield and he got them all labeled and everything.
So, but I mean, you could do it in those days, you see, yeah.
So.
Very nice to have a sort of a hobby like that.
Yes.
To have that interest.
Yes, that's right, yes, that's right, yes.
So.
Well, Doreen, thanks very much for sharing your experiences
and your knowledge and your interest in the Riddikar-Ross.
I'm sure it's enlightened us quite a lot.
Yes.
Many, many thanks.
Yes, yes, yes.
If it's all right with you,
perhaps we could just speak generally
about your earlier life in Radnorshire,
because you're a Radnorshire lady through and through.
Yes, I was born on a farm out in Bister area,
and I mean miles from everywhere.
But in our young days, we had to make our own fun, you see.
I mean, there was no television.
Well, we had a radio,
but we didn't used to listen to that much.
But I can remember my brother,
there wasn't a lot of difference
between my brother and myself.
And we'd have an old bicycle, no, no, a rusty thing,
no tires or anything in it.
And our yard was a bit of an incline at my home.
Well, we'd push this,
push bike up to the top of this incline, get on that.
There was no brakes or anything on it.
We used to come down around the corner of the house
and to stop, we used to go into the manure heap.
Well, there's one way of stopping, I'm sure.
Yes, that's right, yes.
And another thing, and my brother was very good,
what he'd call cobbling up things.
We had a chassis of a pram,
and he put a piece of board on the chassis
and a piece of binder twine or something
to turn the wheels in the front.
And we'd ride on this,
go up the top of the yard again
and go down as far as we could go.
But I mean, we wouldn't go as far on that
as we would on the old bicycle.
But you see, we had to make our own fun.
And I can remember we'd make a playhouse,
we'd have little sticks like that and make little rooms.
And then we'd go and make mud pies
for pretending to have tea.
And we'd find some old little tins or something
and put this in and leave them, bake, turn them out.
That was our way of tea.
Well, we got to make our own fun.
And then as soon as we were able to do little jobs,
we were always given jobs to do on the farm, you see.
I can remember my mother, she was very good that way.
We used to have to carry our water about 100 yards,
I suppose it might've been 150.
Well, as soon as we were able to,
we'd carry half a bucketful to start with from the well.
And then as we'd get a bit stronger,
we'd have two half bucketfuls to balance either side.
And then we'd progress to three quarters of a bucketful.
And then we'd be able to carry two bucketfuls
down to the farmhouse.
So...
Oh, for those days to return.
Yes, that's right, yes.
Wouldn't it be nice?
Oh, yes, we had such a carefree year.
And then we were, my mother especially,
she'd learn me to teach me how to iron,
start off with handkerchiefs.
And you see, we used to heat the flat iron
on an open fire, you see.
And then we'd have a shield to put the iron in.
Well, she put it all ready for me,
but she'd encouraged me to iron little things
on the table, you see.
And then for rabbits, to get me to skin a rabbit,
well, a little, like a young one,
about something three quarters grown.
Well, it was easy to skin then.
And if I did something, well, she praised me so much,
I'd achieve something if I could do that.
She was very good at encouraging us
to do little jobs like that,
because we were helping them,
and it was teaching us how to do something
in the future, you see.
So...
Making you very resourceful, I'm sure.
Yes, that's right, yes.
And then in the harvesting time,
but I was never very good with the harvest.
I was a bit of a weekly one,
and I was a duffer with a pike or a rake, really,
for raking up, because I wasn't doing it right,
and then I'd have a pain up the side of my head.
But we used to be able to take out,
when the men were out on fields,
we take their tea or their food out for them.
Well, no flasks in those days.
We used to make it in bottles.
Well, the tea would only be lukewarm,
because otherwise it would be,
but with milk in it.
But I mean, that was acceptable,
and they had that, and we'd take that out for them
to wherever the hay field was,
and they'd eat that,
and then we'd bring the empties back home with us.
So...
Yes, as you say, a more carefree existence,
and that's the way things were then, I suppose.
Yes, that's right, yes, that's right.
Special days in the year,
I mean, you've mentioned Mayfair.
Yes.
Were there any particular occasions
that really stick out in your memory?
Well, that was, we used to go to Knighton,
was our market town,
and Mayfair, there was the 17th of May,
where we always went there,
but I never liked Mayfair myself.
I don't know why, it didn't appeal to me.
I liked the journey there,
because we used to go by car,
and we thought it was such a long way.
But I never enjoyed Mayfair myself,
but we'd go on the rides and things, you know,
but I was always glad to get back home.
So, that's right, yes.
I remember the Red Mayfair,
that was May the 12th, of course.
Yes, that's right, yes, that's right, yes.
And we used to, I used to go to Sunday school.
We used to walk to a Baptist Sunday school then,
because my mother was Stonch Baptist,
well, and it was the nearest to walk to.
And we'd always have a children's anniversary in the autumn,
you see, where we'd practice singing,
or recitations or something.
We'd get up on the platform and do our duties there.
But that was a special occasion.
Which Baptist chapel was that then?
That's the Pound Baptist Chapel.
The Pound?
Pound, yes.
You go up to Lombister,
and over the top and down the other side.
Right.
Is it still a working chapel?
Oh yes, yes, yes, it's still, yes.
And they still have an anniversary,
but I mean, they have about three children
on the platform now.
Things have certainly changed.
Yes, that's right, yes.
As far as churches have changed.
The chapels have concerned, yes, that's right, yes.
And we used to, well, you see, my primary school,
we could go home for our lunch from where I lived,
go up to school, it was only about half a mile,
to walk to the primary school.
Well then, of course, we never had lunch break.
You see, by the time we'd walk home and have our dinner,
and walk back up, it was time to go back into school.
So we never had any playtime to play with the other children.
And one bone of contention for me was that mother
always supplied the school teacher's wife with milk.
So much skim milk and so much full fat.
Well, I got to carry those tins up in the morning.
Well, I didn't mind doing it in the morning,
but coming home at night,
we could have played with some of the other children,
but the one was enamel.
Well, you see, I got to be very careful with that
because otherwise I would have chipped it.
So that, I always hated having to carry those home with me.
So, yes.
Oh, we could talk for so long, couldn't we,
about days gone by. Yes, that's right, yes.
Bye, yes, that's right, yes.
Thank you, thank you very, very much indeed, Doreen,
for your time, for your knowledge,
and for sharing your memories with us,
which allowed us to record.
Yes, that's right, yes.
So I'll say thank you very, very much indeed.